+++
date = 2024-12-13T22:55:04.000Z
lastmod = 2025-09-23T03:11:54.000Z
title = 'Trust For The Distrustful'
draft = false
slug = 'trust-for-the-distrustful'
t = ['Spiritual Life', 'Writings']
cover = '/981770f4-d5ab-4fdf-85c8-ead6dc8d3748_1280x832-jpeg-1-1.jpg'
summary = '"For we have not a high priest who is unable to sympathize with our weaknesses, but one who in every respect has been tempted as we are, yet without sin." - Hebrews 4:15 (RSV)'
+++

Trust is a fickle thing.

It doesn’t have to be volatile toward an adverse outcome; trust by nature is dynamic, changing by our interactions with just about anyone and anything. Some of us are better at trust than others, maybe due to the lack of adverse results or simply because we’ve learned the value of trust in and of itself - disregarding the possibility of it turning against us and instead placing stock in the ultimately good act of hope. For others, like myself, we cannot correctly establish trust—an internalized risk mitigation.

That doesn’t mean we cannot rely upon others to achieve certain things, something one might consider the bare minimum definition of “trust.” It means that, generally, having that minimum expectation blow up in our faces (maybe one too many times) defines our life experience, so we trade it for self-reliance. We keep an internal bar chart for trust, where one axis is the degree of trust we can place in something, and the other is the subject matter. For example, we can trust paramedics to know a reasonable degree of first aid to stabilize a person sufficiently to be moved onto hospital physicians or what have you. But in what we have learned to be self-reliant with, we eschew any delegation or outside participation. We figured it out before, and we’ll figure it out again next time.

We like our self-control. On the one hand, it provides an additional dimension of meaning in our lives[^1], but on the other, it deprives us of the ability to incorporate others into life’s meaning. After all, we know we can get things done however we want. Even if a helping hand is practical, is it worth the potentially more significant challenge that can come from placing the exact expectations for ourselves onto others? Indeed, there’s no point in going through the effort when we seem to have all the necessary pieces and strategies to resolve the puzzle of our lives.

…but what if we struggle to trust ourselves? Maybe that sounds silly, but for those seeking the narrow path, there comes a point where we have to learn that there are things within us that are not us or have no true origin within us. We learn that there are things within us that should not be trusted, whether it be impulsive or impure thoughts, urges by various phenomena, and so on. Getting to this knowledge while struggling to trust others can result in a mental gridlock[^2] where no one, including ourselves, can be trusted. Of course, this is never truly the case as we are not wholly corrupted beings and, therefore, are not entirely incapable of achieving any good[^3]. Suppose we’ve taken our spiritual lives seriously and obtained these informative experiences. In that case, it assumes that we have some sense of self-reliance and have figures whom we trust for spiritual direction.

---

While we can, to a more significant portion, trust ourselves and experts in their fields (priests, spiritual fathers, etc.), these people are conveniently corporeal, visible, and audible—undeniable in their existence. Yet, there is someone who is not necessarily corporeal, visible, or audible, someone who can be hard to observe working in our lives or, at times, nearly impossible to perceive as achieving good for us: God.

I struggle with trusting God. My life has been defined by years of misplaced trust in those who ought to be trustworthy, to the extent that I have placed so much weight on myself to work out whatever struggles I have that I do not even consider the notion of allowing someone else to position themselves as someone who I can fall back on. This is summed up in a brief conversation I had with my now-stepfather nearly a decade ago:

> him: “You know, [Seraphim], if you ever need to talk man-to-man about anything, I’m here.”  
> me: ”I won’t.”

The point wasn’t that I had an issue with him; it was that I had (have?) an issue with father figures. By the time that conversation happened, I had already gone through 4 father figures, all of which had caused some major disappointment (and exodus) for younger Seraphim. I learned by that point that there was no merit in having such vulnerability with him. After all, I had spent most of my life figuring it out myself, piecing together a masculine perspective derived from the inverse of what the previous 4 did. Whatever difference was to be offered seemed meager compared to the potential for things to end up the same way as the rest (in validation, it kind of did).

While my trust issues are not exclusive to father figures, this all contributes to conditioning myself to be configured to rely more upon myself and less upon others whose reliability may be volatile, not that I would be necessarily interested in the investment required to assess that volatility. When it comes to God, who is, in some sense, more intangible than these clearly real humans, perceivably only around when I’m feeling good and totally absent when I’m not, the difficulty becomes significantly amplified. How am I to trust Him in light of all the disappointment I’ve faced from others?

I’m acutely aware that these problems originate with me. After all, it is *I* who allow myself to be unreasonably guarded, unable to allow anyone the possibility of violating my trust, just as it is my responsibility that I cannot easily perceive God’s providence in my life during times of struggle or crisis. Sure, I can speak about it theoretically—how it’s meant to be according to what I’ve learned—but to say that I genuinely believe any of it is another hurdle. When a resolution to some struggle comes about, sure, God has helped me, but I was the one who did or said *x*, *y*, and/or *z* to get the desired outcome. Therefore, my impeccable self-reliance wins again, to the scorn of any outsider who dares insinuate that I may lack what I need to figure things out. Another tally to my undefeated streak!

This is clearly an untenable, self-defeating position, a wooden house on sand bound to become ash on glass once some other difficult situation comes my way and sets it all ablaze. It is insane to rebuild everything in the same way, hoping it will be different the next time. Yet for myself, someone who struggles with trusting in God’s providence due to my dispositions caused by past experiences, it is incredibly difficult to have “Jesus take the wheel.”

Another element that makes *developing* trust in God a challenge is that it may seemingly feel like we’re being passive in our struggles. In many of our struggles, we may have invitations to take action to ease our situation, but in others, we have no tangible control: all we can do is pray and have hope for the situation. In the struggle for trust, we also have to hope our hope is not misplaced. Disappointment is the product of expectations not matching reality, and we have been disappointed many times. When we realize our seeming passivity to the difficulties we’re in, we may deal with anxiety and self-doubt (from our lack of ability); depending on disposition, these paths result in panic, depression, or a mixture of both.

A real-world example from yours truly: a couple of days ago[^4], my family and I were down the highway, and our car’s exhaust pipe rusted out, causing the muffler to fall on one end. We had roadside assistance tow the car to a repair shop and had a friend collect us off the highway and take us home. The following morning, I got a phone call saying the repairs would cost over $1,200 and our warranty does not cover these problems.[^5] While we have a vehicle to use until ours is repaired, by the generosity of my parents, we do not have $1,200 ready. Admittedly, we are not great with finances. We maintain a budget to the best of our ability, but these situations and our impulsive endeavors cause complications. Short of some intervention somewhere, the only foreseeable option is hoping to take advantage of the shop’s financing avenue. Any other means of getting some extra income sprinkled in will be insufficient to cover the costs and will likely take longer than the repairs to get into our wallet. This means our only tangible course of action is praying and hoping something works out providentially and that whatever result we get will not jeopardize our finances in the future.

The day of the phone call, I had a lot of anxiety and depression. I have no secure path to resolution. I’ve been praying for our struggle to be relieved with no clarity thus far. I have to fight the temptation of despair and the temptation to scorn God and everyone (including myself). I have nothing but my hope that something changes in our favor.

None of this is to say that I’m out here panhandling on Substack for financial relief—I have other avenues to do this. Having utilized them in the past, I am not eager to seek more angel investments from people who have already done so much for our family and the non-profit endeavors I run. Some of these may be willing and able. Still, an unhealthy pattern becomes established: *x* happens to Seraphim. Seraphim’s bad financial management and resulting tight budget don’t permit resolution to *x*. Seraphim can obtain relief from *y*, and lessons aren’t learned—rinse and repeat. Is this reasonable or realistic? I don’t know; I’m unfamiliar with this sort of trust.

---

All of this is to say that trust is complicated, and while we may have good justifications for being hesitant to take trust falls from people not catching us in the past, we must make some distinctions. The first is that God is not like us; God seeks our ultimate good and will provide us with what we need when we need it, not necessarily when we want it. When our backs are against the wall with no options available, giving these things up to God and trusting in His providence is okay; remain faithful and pray fervently. In situations where some circumstances are self-inflicted (like ours), we have to make the intention and effort to correct our mistakes—this, too, is part of repentance. The second is that when our choices and good timing seemingly resolve our situation, we cannot take credit and embolden our self-reliance. We must glorify God instead of ourselves, learning that every good and perfect gift comes from Him. We also must glorify God for permitting our chastisement. Gold is purified by fire; our souls are purified by struggle. The third is that we must leave despondency at the door. Whether we have confidence in our self-reliance or God’s providence, it doesn’t necessitate developing a high tolerance for risk and allowing ourselves to get into positions where a new struggle or a new development may easily thrash us. There may be exceptions, but don’t bite off more than you can chew in most cases.

Thank you for reading. Please pray for us.

[^1]: One might think of “My Way” by Frank Sinatra.
[^2]: Assuming one’s self-reliance is wholly distorted from said knowledge, which is erroneous and a misunderstanding. This sort of mental trap is what I am addressing, however, and even for those who may not have such an intense lack of self-trust, this issue can still come up in moments of crisis or struggle.
[^3]: This is not an argument for Pelagianism. I’m assuming my audience is baptized Christians, therefore enabled by God to achieve good deeds—no apologies to Calvinists.
[^4]: One could argue that it’s providential that such a situation happened while I was working on this article. “A couple of days ago” is when this happened in relation to me writing this section.
[^5]: For what it’s worth, the warranty might’ve been expired anyway.
